so this talk once surround Epsilon
eridani is a chance to look at one of
the sun's near Neighbors in space and a
relatively sunlike star that turns up a
lot in science
fiction Epson eridani is 10 and a half
light years away and is one of the sun's
near
neighbors you can see it just down to
the bottom right of Orion using Riel as
a guide work your way along the conell
of eridanus the river and you will find
a fairly modest magnitude 3.4 star
called epyon
eridani it proper name is ran and that's
uh come from a public consultation a
public vote um represents the north
Norse goddess of the sea and they were
lucky they didn't end up with Starry
mstar face in my opinion but there you
go so turns out that this one is is
relatively nearby 10 and a half light
years away measured by Parallax um in
around
1910 and one of the clues that led
people to start studying this one was
the very high uh amount that it moves
from year toe proper motion is moving
three Arc seconds every year so about a
thousandth of a degree every year it's
moving across the sky so would clearly
take about a thousand years before it
would have moved
um one degree 500 years to change by the
size of the full moon on the sky but not
something you're easily going to notice
but measurements can reveal it quite
easily the star itself it's a little bit
smaller than the sun it's classed as a
orange dwarf star a CED type orange star
but it's one of the relatively hotter
end with a K2 classification these
classifications go from 0er to 9
within each letter class where zero is
the hottest and nine is the coolest so
K2 is a fairly hot k type
star you can see the temperature there
just over 5,000 Dees Kelvin and that
makes it about 700 degrees cooler than
our
sun and it's cooler and smaller because
the mass is lower 82% and just 73% of
the radius compared to the Sun
but very un uh much different about it
is it's a very young star only somewhere
between 400 and 800 million years which
is nothing in terms of star ages our sun
is perhaps
4,600 million years old way older than
Epsilon
aradani we have detected some Sunspot
Cycles there appear to be two a
threeyear and a 13-year cycle both going
at once that's rather strange
now because the star is that much cooler
and that much smaller the total heat
output is only just over a third that of
the sun
35% and that means that to be at a
temperature as the Earth is you need to
be that much closer so rather than the
earth being which is nicely in the
middle of the habitable zone for soul
half star in this case you need to be
between half that and that distance 0.5
to one astronomical unit now as the star
gets older as its internals reorganize
it burns hydrogen to helium using
nuclear fusion dumps the helium in the
core the core shrinks things change and
it will gradually increase its power
output and its temperature as it ages
and so that habitable zone will expand
outwards to roughly the same as our own
as things go through the life
cycle now in terms of
planets this man turns up in several of
my talks Peter Van de Camp very active
astronomer and he thought he had
detected I think Planet orbiting
around Epsilon eridani every 25 years um
that's quite difficult he he based his
observations on continual reading of the
position of the star moving against the
background all the way from 1938 till
1972 so big range of uh observations but
nobody else was really able to confirm
that this detection was true and it
would appear in 1993 long after Peter
passed away that the mystery was solved
and that there was a problem with the
errors in measuring of the photographic
plates which was leading him to the
false conclusion so sorry Peter it
wasn't really
there what was there was a disc of dust
and the IRAs satellite an infrared
satellite took a photograph which is
shown here on the left in false color
with red being cool and yellow and
orange and white being hotter of this
disc of material around Epsilon eridani
tilted at an angle to us and just for
scale there you've got the size of
Pluto's orbit so the rough size of the
solar system this is quite a big dis um
reminiscent in some ways of the koer
belt discovered by the IRAs telescope
and in fact further Studies have
revealed there are two asteroid belts an
Ino one at about three astronomical
units and another one um
Beyond and so it's quite likely that
these are being shephered by the
movement of a set of planets and that uh
we will eventually discover that it's a
system not unlike our own with an inner
asteroid belt and an outer belt like the
Copa
belt 2006 I think we found a Jupiter
sized planet um Planet B and this seems
to be orbiting around the star uh
roughly every seven years in a slightly
itical orbit but with the same tilt as
the uh disc of dust so it's highly
likely that this is the planet that is
at least corralling one of the uh
aspects of these belts of dust these
asteroid or coer belt
equivalence a little bit more about that
um it's about 3.5 Au and about the same
mass as Jupiter now it's been
controversial for some time so you may
read that uh there has been some people
debating this but the uh since 2000 I
think we've got come to the conclusion
that this one is now confirmed so
Epsilon eridani B is a real
thing what's less certain is Epsilon
eridani C the next planet this is more
based on calculations and simulations of
the behavior of the Dust disc rather
than a more direct measurement and this
could be in a very wide orbit at around
40 Au taking 280 years to go around but
I say this one is definitely still in
the hypothetical Planet
category nowon aradani was one of the
targets that Frank Drake directed his
search for exal extraterrestrial life
towards project osma uh they made lots
and lots of observations and
unfortunately found nothing so far and
that's been followed up time and again
so the this is a very much a a high
priority Target for the setti project
and indeed the project Phoenix which was
part of that used this uh large radio
telescope which you see
here 1995 to look for any microwaves
coming from the uh possible
civilizations there but having looked at
this star and 799 others not found
anything so popular was Epsilon eridani
as a potentially habitable system that
the British interplanetary Society had
it on its Target list for the project
datus Fusion powered rocket ship that
was going to fly on a 50-year mission
out to visit the star system two- stage
monster here way way bigger than
anything that mankind has ever built
would have to to be assembled in orbit
and use technology that we don't have in
terms of fusion power and things to try
to uh fly to the stars but Epsilon
aradani was right on the target
list so why haven't we found anything
well perhaps Epsilon eridani at only 400
to 800 million years old is still in the
very very earliest stages of its
existence and at that stage Earth had
just about managed to evolve some very
primitive bacteria so not really going
to be building any radios anytime soon
um so it might be worth a visit but it's
probably two younger star system to be
top of my list I would rather go
elsewhere and if you want to see a
couple of candidates for that then have
a look at once around
TTI and once around 40 eridani as my two
favorite candidates rather than this one
so thanks very much for listening I'll
bring that to a halt there